---
layout: post
title:  "Considering Phlebas"
date:   19-01-2015 21:00:00
---

Iain Banks is an interesting beast, an author of both literary and science fiction, and a success in both genres. I wonder if part of that success stems from not only being an excellent writer but by inserting a middle initial into his name when writing sci-fi, thus allowing booksellers to file his work under two names in two categories. Must help with electronic catalogues. Of such things are careers made.

I first discovered Banks’ science fiction, devouring his Culture series of novels named after the technologically superior and utopian human/AI race which provides the focus of most of his narratives. I confess, I’ve never read Bank’s literary outings, as I suspect neither have many of his sci-fi followers, and vice versa. For me this is just a matter of personal choice, the value of the writing, the voice of the writer are things which don’t change with the inclusion or exclusion of a back-talking drone or two.

Consider Phlebas is the first of the Culture novels, published in 1987. The specific genre could be called epic space opera; it’s an extensive piece revolving around an immense cosmic war between the Iridians (an alien species of religious cultists) and the Culture. Our protagonist is caught between the warring factions, one Bora Horza Gobuchul (fantastic names are common to Banks – look out for the names of the spaceships. Screw Loose, Just Read The Instructions, and the Of Course I Still Love You to name a few). Horza is a human agent working for the Iridians, with the ability to shapeshift his form in order to penetrate enemy lines. 

It’s an interesting line to take, as it immediately becomes clear that Banks’ loyalties lie with the Culture, Horza’s adversaries. Our first introduction to the Culture then, is through the eyes of one heavily biased against them.

Horza makes an unusual protagonist, his values being chiefly set against those the reader is encouraged to feel. The Culture is essentially a utopia, Horza’s opposition to it based largely on anti-AI prejudice. Later novels almost all focus on the Culture and the race gives its name to Bank’s entire series. Why here then is the protagonist an enemy of the civilisation the author clearly sees as enlightened and humanist? Dramatic tension? First World Utopia problems? A little from column A, a little from column B. It’s very hard to wring drama from people living contented lives within the best of all possible worlds. Horza’s life is far from content, his world far from the best.

The majority of the novel concerns itself with chasing a McGuffin. It takes the form of a ‘Mind’, the colossal AIs of the Culture which are capable of intelligence to operate star ships and control worlds. As a result, they are also one of the Culture’s most powerful weapons. One such Mind has crash landed on a dead planet watched over by a mysterious super-race. After Horza is separated from his allies in battle, he must struggle to claim the Mind before the Culture does. McGuffins – how did we write books without them?

All of this implies this is a plot driven novel, but it’s really not. Its heart lies in its adventure and breath-taking scope. As soon as the novel begins we’re faced with Horza’s imminent and gruesome execution, swiftly followed by a bold rescue, a battle, space pirates, shoot-outs, cannibals, religious zealots, romance and a whole lot of people dying. And that’s only half way through.

Everywhere, there is an emphasis on scale. The war between the two races spans thousands of worlds, there are trillions of casualties. There’s an artificial world that spans a sun, which is so vast it can take two kilometre long ships flying continuously across its surface. Banks highlights the sheer scale of his worlds even when focusing on plot. Horza, for instance, spends a good deal of time, unwillingly, on a small island on this ringworld, and its claustrophobia constantly reminds us of the stellar scale of Banks’ universe.

Across this universe, Culture people live on orbital platforms so gigantic they accommodate synthetic mountain ranges, seas, millions of residents. A dead planet houses kilometres of tunnels containing huge trains built to survive nuclear warfare. In all places, there is scale, scope, vastness. Card players gamble on worlds on the verge of falling into black holes, peoples are so diverse that long dead civilisations that spanned solar systems are referenced but long forgotten, a war so massive it encompassed decades and caught thousands of species in its midst, yet is ultimately described as a “small, short war”.

The sense of scope works extremely well, space opera at its best. It also permits Banks to do something very clever. Horza and his companions all consider themselves vital to the war effort, and traditionally, they would be. Here however, their deeds are more side quests than main plot of the overarching events, important to those involved but with few wider consequences. Wars are built of many small battles, some of which may be tactically significant, but in the overall context rarely determine loss or victory in the ultimate outcome. Banks continuously undermines his protagonist, while making the span and grandeur of his genre the true centrepiece of the novel.

The fallout of this is that many of the surrounding characters are quite forgettable. Light characterisation and broadly drawn, identifiable sci-fi stock are common.  Horza’s lover is an exotic, fur-covered mercenary (what is it with sci-fi and furry women? Actually, don’t answer that). His side-kick is a back-talking passive aggressive drone who, despite popular belief, is more than the sum of his programming, and who provides much of the novel’s comic relief.

Another issue is pacing. There are sequences that are completely thrilling: a frantic firefight in an alien temple, a daring escape from a giant and dying ship, Horza clinging to the outside of a shuttle under enemy fire. And all are quite, quite unnecessary to the plot. When Horza is captured by a brutal cannibalistic cult and achieves a gruesome (and graphic) means of escape, he continues on his journey as if nothing has happened. It’s all good fun, but it can be a diversion from the main drive of the narrative.

One more, but it’s a nit-pick. I’ll hide behind my bookcase when I say that the science can sometimes be a bit off. This isn’t hard sci-fi, and doesn’t pretend to be (see Alistair Reynolds for that, he’s a master) so moaning about hyperspace without causality violation would be fundamentally missing the point. But I did roll the eyes a little when a character travelling in a vacuum at 1G switched off their jet suit and promptly came to a nice stop. Just me then? Thankfully, there’s no attempt at trying to rationalise the super-science, the characters understand it no better than I understand the workings of my iPhone and take its operating equally for granted.

Irrespective of niggles of character, pacing, and scenic yet pointless diversions, the novel is extremely readable. Banks writes with a black wit, compiles fantastic set pieces, and paints fascinating species and worlds which are bright and vibrant. There is, above all, a sense of sheer joy in the telling. I might have wondered, once or twice, whether pages of description for a card game was actually necessary in the grand scheme of things, but I loved reading it nonetheless.

There’s a lot I’ve not discussed here; the intricacies of the narrative, the secondary characters of Horza’s lover, the Iridian extremist, or the space pirate captain. They’re all great but that’s not really the point. Consider Phlebas is a creation of epic wars, huge spacecraft, terrifying alien civilisations and galactic scope. It’s what most people think of when they think of sci-fi, unashamedly so, and it’s complete celebration of the powers of the genre is for me both refreshing and a reminder of how good space opera can be when it’s done well.

