---
layout: post
title:  "Review: Moriarty, by Anthony Horowitz"
date:   24-02-2015 21:28:00
categories: film review
---
Reliable narrators are hard to come by, a statement that followers of Dr Watson's writings will confirm with an understanding mutter. That's why I happily welcomed the first-person speaker who opens Anthony Horowitz's Moriarty when he asks, "Does anyone really believe what happened at Reichenbach Falls?" The voice introduces himself as Frederick Chase, a Pinkerton agent who has travelled over the pond to London in pursuit of his quarry, an American crime-lord to rival Moriarty's powers. Chase begins his tale with a confession that his story-telling skills are liable to fall short of Watson's degree of accuracy and appeal. This is talking about the narrator who attributes both Moriarty brothers with the same first name and reports that while he was in Afghanistan he himself was shot either in the shoulder or in the leg. The informed reader should be immediately concerned, and as it turns out, rightly so.

On the face of things, Chase is investigating a suspected alliance between Moriarty and American gangster, Clarence Devereux. But this is a Holmesian pastiche, and so nothing is as simple as it seems. One such difficulty is the complete and total absence of Holmes himself. At the time of Horowitz's tale, Holmes is still pretending to be at the bottom of Reichenbach Falls. In his place is Inspector Athelney Jones, whom you may have met in The Sign of Four and other canon cases. Horowitz's Jones has been transformed from Conan Doyle's arrogant and small-minded bobby to a Sherlockian clone. Jones' failures to Holmes' genius has made him a convert, and in truth, some of his deductions are so sleek such moments make it clear why Horowitz is a worthy successor to Conan Doyle.

It's an interesting move. Even if a modern writer like Horowitz reproduces Holmes exactly, they can only ever produce an imitation of the original works - something Horowitz pulled off nicely with his last effort, The House of Silk. However, a wide array of options appear when that writer instead mines Conan Doyle's world for ammunition for similar characters with similar motivations and methods.

This past year has been one filled with recreated classics, with the detectives of Raymond Chandler and Agatha Christie both receiving 21<sup>st</sup> century updates. The concept raises interesting questions about why crime fiction fans have developed such nostalgia for the crime-fighting heroes of yesteryear. It is surely a sound move that Horowitz, one of the most prolific (fictional) murderers of Poirot, Foyle's War and Midsummer Murders fame, is chosen for such a duty.

That said, Horowitz only runs with the concept so far. In spite of the title, it's the ghost of Holmes that pervades the pages of Moriarty. Inspector Jones parrots catchphrases; cases are "a three-pipe problem" and "elementary" (Jones is obviously a novice at heart, or else he would know Holmes never actually says the famous line in Watson's accounts.) The inspector proposes that he and Chase set themselves up as a new private detective partnership, with offices just round the corner from Baker Street complete with their very own Mrs Hudson housekeeper. Rather than a keen student of Holmes, Jones is revealed to be a somewhat disturbing ventriloquist's dummy.

Horowitz recreates Victorian London in a similar way. Long, detailed passages evoke Doyle's style nicely, but Horowitz does not share his typical shading of the darker sides of the nineteenth century city. Poverty and decay are rife in these streets, and thrown into sharp relief by the nauseating decadence of the criminals who corrupt them.

Meanwhile, the plot fairly charges along, peppered with assassinations, kidnaps, torture and explosions. The body of the story itself is fairly typical, but is set alight by the final revelation, which forces the reader to ferociously turn back to the opening pages to see how they ever could have missed those vital clues. "It is like reading a book in which the chapters have been published in the wrong order," Inspector Jones protests as he struggles to unravel the case before him. "Or where the writer has deliberately set out to confuse." Take note, unsuspecting reader.

In the end, Moriarty has its cake by spiritedly re-envisioning Holmes' world and eats it by playfully mocking it - and, by extension, his eternal charm. "Much of what he said was unsound, unscientific and occasionally preposterous," a Scotland Yard inspector grumbles. "We believed him because he got results, but it was not a sound platform for modern detective work."

Anthony Horowitz may not be the most deferential of the many authors who have endeavored to bring Sherlock Holmes to life again, but Moriarty demonstrates that he is undoubtedly one of the most entertaining.
