---
layout: post
title:  "The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies"
date:   11-02-2015 21:28:00
categories: film review
---

The poster proudly proclaims The Battle of the Five Armies as ‘The Defining Chapter’ of Peter Jackson’s Hobbit trilogy. If the definition of definition is to clarify something, I must disagree with Mr Jackson. Unlike the novel, joyfully elegant in its simplicity and brevity, the film is a muddle. Characterisation and motivation are often confused or absconded, emotional thematics seem bolted on, even unengaging, and logic goes systematically out the window. Saying this, I can’t deny that I enjoyed it. A better definition then, might be that of portraying the essence of something. This it does, in spades. The film is an orgy of special effects, 90 minute fight scenes and running around. It is more C. G. I. Tolkien than J. R. R, but it does capture the sheer awe and grandeur of his created world. 

The cold opening of the film is worthy of Bond, inserted presumably to provide two things. 1: a cliff hanger for the second film in which 95% of the audience already knew or could guess the fate of the fire breathing dragon 2: an ‘attention grabbing’ opener to the third film, which resulted in, for me at least, an odd feeling of dissatisfaction when Benedict Cumbersmaug dies 5 minutes in. Nevertheless, the dragon sets Laketown ablaze and provides the film with its first THEMATIC MESSAGE. I don’t know what it is about fantasy and sci-fi and their overtly obvious thematic messages. Perhaps it’s because they can so meaningfully hold up the cracked mirror to our broken society from a disillusioned yet hopeful distance. Or perhaps they just sound good being yelled out by a ruggedly handsome leading man falling to his knees midst a slow zoom. 

Anyway. Said message concerns political figures being generally untrustworthy chaps, unconcerned with the welfare of the people. To personify, enter the wonderful Stephen Fry as the Master of Laketown, cowardly fleeing his burning town laden down with gold. In contrast, we have ruggedly handsome Bard, whose pronounced Welsh accent would be less odd if all the other Laketowners weren’t speaking generic fantasy cockney. Bard goes postal on the dragon, climbing a clock-tower and firing vollies of arrows at its gilded hide (insert ‘How Green is my Volley?’ gag here). He seems to have forgotten the prophesy drilled into us in the last film that only the Black Arrow, a harpoon style arrow carried by Bard’s ancestors, can kill a dragon. Luckily, his son isn’t so forgetful, appearing with it in the nick of time. Somehow using an ordinary bowstring of his now broken bow and his son as an arrow rest, Bard defeats both Smaug and the laws of conserved momentum in a single blow. The corpse of Cumberslain then serves up the THEMATIC MESSAGE again by promptly squishing Stephen Fry and his boat o’ treasure. 

The next rendition of the THEMATIC MESSAGE comes from Thorin’s ‘dragon sickness’, which predominates the first half of the film. His obsession with the cursed but oh so shiny Arkenstone drives Thorin to raging paranoia about his dwarven company, betraying the refugee Laketowners, walling himself up in his own fortress and generally being a rather bad egg. The Elf King Thranduil provides yet another example, rocking up on an elk with his army. What Thranduil is doing with an Elk mount, surely a creature native to tundra and plains, in the densely forested Mirkwood is unclear. Nevertheless, Thranduil’s denial of reality and isolationist policies have already been established in Hobbit 2, and his thoughtless abandonment of his civil and moral responsibilities continue in Hobbit 3. Thranduil’s sole motivation, it seems, is that Erebor houses a certain necklace he feels is owed him – a weak enough grounds for war that the film never really explains. Bard forms a fragile alliance with the elves, but his efforts to make Thorin honour his promises and aid the now homeless Laketowners fall on deaf ears.

Meanwhile, Galadriel, Elrond, and Saruman have rescued Gandalf from Dol Guldor and the three battle against Sauron and his Nazgul in a quite spectacular fight scene. I was disappointed to see Galadriel spend most of the time lying frailly on the floor. She finishes the fight in a powerful spell, but I would have liked to have seen one of the most powerful beings on Middle-Earth in a more active role than playing the prostrate damsel for most of the scene. But I digress. On Gandalf’s return, Thranduil flat out refuses to acknowledge his warning of a massive Orc army heading his way. War seems imminent, and the elves and Laketowners look hopelessly outmatched. Enter stage-right Billy Connolly riding in straddling a giant pig. A better sentence I never wrote. Connolly is Dain Ironfoot, a dwarvish king, and he’s brought his army with him.

The second half of the film begins then with these four armies squaring off. The Orc commander, Azog has somehow erected a gigantic semaphore command tower without anybody noticing. I’ll repeat that: without ANYBODY noticing. From these heights he commands the fifth army led through tunnels dug by the rock-munching Sandworms from Dune. Why Azog didn’t use these worms to dig underneath the opposing armies and bury them before the battle even begins, or where these gigantic worms disappear to after their work is done will remain a mystery. Similarly mysterious is the sudden pulling together of the armies of men, dwarves and elves in an effort that should have taken months of rehearsal time with cardboard swords. One stunt involves the dwarves forming a shield wall for the elves to simultaneously lunge over into the oncoming orcs. While battle rages around him, Thorin has a good long think standing on a massive golden floor that trips out to reflect ‘Thorin’s troubled state of mind’ (read: it looks cool), but only really goes to show the true appropriateness of his full name; Thorin Oakenacting. Presumably it is the resulting motion sickness that cures Thorin of his dragon sickness, as he promptly charges into battle with his people. He then has the idea of cutting the head off the snake by killing Azog, and thereby make the thousands of remaining orcs presumably dissolve or convert to Buddhism or something. So Thorin, Fili, Kili,  Stabbi, Shooti, and Dori the Explorer saddle up some huge armoured war-rams that just happened to be standing around and which nobody else has thought of utilising in the battle, to go get Azog.

In the meantime, Legolas has been scouting North (who looks weirdly older than he does in Lord of the Rings set 60 years after current events) with the fictional Tauriel (yes, I know they’re all fictional, but you know what I mean. Not canon.) They find yet another dark fortress filled with a goblin army led by Bolg (so, six armies then?) Accompanying them are a cloud of shrieking war-bats. “They are bred for one purpose only…” Legolas tells Tauriel, visibly counting inwardly one Mississippi, two Mississippi, three Mississippi, before completing the line: “…war!” On the contrary, these bats play almost no part in the war, which leads me to the conclusion that they are in fact bred for one purpose only…CGI spectacle. To warn their allies, Legolas and Tauriel rush back only to bump into a fight scene with Bolg, Kili, Azog, and Thorin. These guys face off interchangeably, fighting on even after what should have been several killing blows. And on and on.

It’s at this point when someone shouts (or they should do): “the eagles are coming!” the universal Middle-Earthen cry of the approach of the deus ex machina. Why people never order the eagles in earlier always baffles me. Need a lift to Erebor? Eagles. Need to defeat overwhelming odds in battle? Eagles. Dropping off a ring somewhere? Eagles can help. The eagles (seven armies) arrive with the other animalistic allies, and we’re treated to 5 seconds of Radagast the Brown, and 3 seconds of Beorn sky-diving down mid bear-transformation into battle. These guys turn the fight around and there’s nothing much left but for Thorin to die following having a sword thrust through his abdomen 57 minutes earlier. 

Given that this film covers far less ground than the previous two, and therefore should be more tightly constructed and succinct, it’s the opposite. I enjoyed it, just as I enjoyed Harry Potter 7 part 2 and The Return of the King and as I’m sure I’ll enjoy Hunger Games 3 part 2, but just like these titles, Five Armies suffers from an excess of time and special effects. Like the dragon-sick dwarf hungers for more shiny things, filmmakers are continuously wanting more spectacle, more content, even when their source material really doesn’t have any more to give. Perhaps the thing I disliked most about the film was its glut of CGI. In The Fellowship of the Ring, the grand majority of close up shots of fighting, riding, or anything else that the insurance will cover is done by stunt people. And is all the better for it. In Five Armies, most of the legwork is done is done by a computer. Characters look rubbery, moves are unrealistically flamboyant. Heck, I mistook Luke Evans for Legolas three times because Bloom’s face is so photo-shopped into mask-like fake youth.

What’s worse is that the narrative suffers as a result. Too little is made of what should be major plot points. The One Ring is barely seen or mentioned, nor is Bilbo’s growing obsession with it. The fact the Bilbo keeping the ring secret from Gandalf is inexplicably thrown away when Gandalf reveals he’s known about it all along. The only role the Ring plays is a nod to The Lord of the Rings. And it’s not just the ring: Bilbo gift of the mithril shirt is neither detailed nor utilised. Saruman snarling “leave Sauron to me” is an epic nod but as cheesy as Christopher Lee’s Hammer Horror days. The worst offence comes at the end, when Legolas is advised by Thranduil to “seek out a ranger in the North who is known as Strider” but whose “true name you will have to find out for yourself”. Lee Pace might as well have winked to camera. There is a sense of Jackson looking lovingly out from behind his screen at points like this. “It’s for the fans – for the fans.” I can see the point, the films are Jackson’s babies and the choices he makes come from love. And yes, the fangirl in me squeals at each and every nod from behind the bars of her cage. 

For all its many characters and thousands of CG extras, the film seems to ignore the sense of community previous films had. The dwarven company seem distant, with the focus really on Thorin and fan-favourite Kili only. Other key characters; Bilbo, Gandalf, Legolas are pushed aside in favour of newly created characters like Tauriel - inserted to try to even the gender skewed cast-list and failing miserably for making her overtly sexy, focussing her story solely on her love interests, and having her insipidly submit to and her will shot down by three separate men on numerous occasions. Or unnecessary amounts of screen time is given to minor characters like Laketown Master’s assistant Alfrid whose simpering patheticness, rather than being funny or encouraging that ‘love to hate’ vibe, is just plain annoying. Perhaps it’s this choice focus on the individual, rather than Mortal Combat style fight scenes, war-bats, and make believe she-elves, is the main issue with the film. Jackson works in Romantic and post-Romantic visions of tragic, fatally flawed Byronic heroes. Tolkien, however, is a dedicated pre-Romantic author, who works in the language of community, people, and togetherness. His villains are forces, such as the Ring, that isolate the individual from their community.

I suspect it has something to do with the film’s THEMATIC MESSAGE. It’s a 21st century fashion to distrust and hate politicians. The only good leaders in the whole film are Bard (whose actions are clearly led by family ties rather than wider societal responsibilities) and Gandalf, who is beaten, weakened and ignored for much of the film. The Master of Laketown is petty and cowardly. Thorin descends into paranoia, and although he emerges from the other side, he is rewarded only by death. Thranduil is arrogant, cold, and close-minded. It might over stretch analysis to see all this as a more meta transferral of mistrust of artistic authority. In other words, of Tolkien himself, whose great work is deserving of the film-making task but whose material is so challenging to recreate in film. Jackson struggles with this contradiction of appreciation and frustration by distorting the original ‘authority’ in innovative, chaotic and not always successful ways.

