---
layout: post
title:  "Now That's Edutainment!"
date:   29-06-2015 19:00:00
---

There’s a new trend emerging surrounding engagement in schools. As with all
pedagogical trends, there is a kernel of truth in it, rolled up in ego and
served on a silver plate of conviction.

No-one in education is a stranger to the notion of 'edutainment'. Recently, all
Ofsted had to do was channel Veruca Salt and whisper in ominous tones, 'bring me
a golden goose...now', and SLTs countrywide hauled in the decorators; exchanging
staffroom chairs to twiggy nests; introduced compulsory befeathered costumes for
all staff, and perched, bucket in hand, for the resulting golden eggs to drop.

Such persistent demands have led to a growth industry, mainly targeted towards
'perfect' Ofsted lessons. If I had a penny every time the word ‘outstanding’ has
been mentioned in meetings I've been a part of...well I'd have enough for a tall
non-fat latte with caramel drizzle.

Most insights regarding outstanding lessons have centred on creating a 'hive of
learning'. First, AFL techniques went Technicolour, with traffic lights on every
surface. The introduction of compulsory ICT into the curriculum guaranteed
teachers were making blinking, beeping, swooshing kaleidoscopes of lessons. When
observations were abridged to 20 minutes and Progress was the new monster to be
fed, mini plenaries were the amuse bouche of choice. Teachers endeavoured to
include as many crowd pleasers as possible, often resulting in a plate of
scrambled egg rather than a soufflé.

None of this means educators ever really bought into the ideas of edutainment.
Not even SLT. All anyone ever wanted was to teach in the most effective ways.
Those teachers who did buy into these ways knew full well that it was a charade
to hide the real teaching and learning, and that although students may get
excited and engage with reckless abandon, teaching day to day is a cross country
hike not an annual Gloucestershire Cheese rolling race.

Now the most influential and loudest voices in education are latched on to the
concept of ‘edutainment’, and trying to parallel the gimmick with the philosophy
of Progress. Oddly, without a suggestion of irony, many of these supporters seem
to have once been believers of the ideas they now shun, so they jump to the
logical conclusion we all were...

But here is where I part ways with the critics of edutainment, because
engagement is different, and child focussed ideology has a longer, and far more
esteemed past than an AFL traffic light.

Believing in children being engaged in class doesn't equate to wanting them
doing parkour in the classroom with a Google Glass camera strapped to their
foreheads. Wanting children to read for pleasure shouldn’t stop teachers setting
them Carnegie medal winning literature, or providing them with stimulating and
challenging reading day to day.

There’s plenty of room for a variety of teaching techniques in every classroom:
drama, games, group work, but these surely must be tempered with moments of
silence, concentration and independent work. Engagement need not equate to
edutainment, and student-focussed need not mean lowered expectations.
